doc: osd migration design (#14719)
rook/rook: design/ceph/osd-migration.md

# OSD Migration

## Summary

> - Automatically replace all the existing OSDs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatically replace all the existing OSDs in specific conditions where configuration changes do not allow for the OSDs to be upgraded
```

## Motivation:

- Certain scenarios like enabling encryption on existing OSDs or changing the OSD
  backend store require the users to manually purge the OSDs and then create new ones.
  Rook should be able to migrate the OSDs automatically without any user intervention.

## Goals

- Support automatic OSD migration for following scenarios:
    - Change OSD backing store

>     - Enable OSD encryption as a day-2 operation

Reviewer: What about disabling? That seems possible, but perhaps nobody would actually want to do it in reality.

Author: We can support both enabling and disabling.

  and application data on slower media.
- Setups with multiple OSDs per drive, though with recent Ceph releases the
  motivation for deploying this way is mostly obviated.
- Mix of encrypted and unencrypted OSDs in the cluster.

## Proposal
- Since migration requires destroying of the OSD and cleaning data from the disk,
  a user confirmation in the CR is required before proceeding.

> - Operator would identify the OSDs that need migration by looking at the labels on

Reviewer: How about in a more detailed section below, discuss how OSD deployment labels are used? This statement can stay general. Then you can mention which labels will help identify which scenario is requiring the migration (encryption, store type, etc)
```suggestion
- Operator would identify the OSDs that need migration according to the changed settings
```

  the OSD deployments.
- Operator would display the status of OSD migration in the cephCluster CR status.

### API Changes
- Add `spec.storage.migrateOSDs` in the CephCluster resource.

  ```yaml
  storage:
    migrateOSDs: yes-really-migrate-osds
  ```
  - `migrateOSDs`: Confirmation from the user that they really want to migrate the OSDs.
    This field can only take the value `yes-really-migrate-osds`.

### Enable Encryption
- Storage spec for a brownfield cluster without encryption:
```yaml
storage:
   storageClassDeviceSets:
     - name: set1
       count: 3
       encrypted: false
```
- User can enable encryption by updating the spec:
``` yaml
 storage:

>    migrateOSDs: "yes-really-migrate-osds"

Reviewer: How about keeping a separate confirmation field, in case we need other migration settings in the future?
```suggestion
   migration: 
     confirmation: "yes-really-migrate-osds"
```

   storageClassDeviceSets:
     - name: set1
       count: 3
       encrypted: true  # changed to true
```

- Operator will check the existing OSD deployment labels to identify the OSDs that are not encrypted.
- Operator will start the migration for these OSDs.

### Update OSD backend Store:
- Storage spec for a brownfield cluster without encryption would look like:
```yaml
storage:
   store:
     type: bluestore
```
- User can change backend store by updating the spec as below:
``` yaml
 storage:
   migrateOSDs: "yes-really-migrate-osds"
   store:

>      type: <new-backend-store>  # changed to new backend store type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     type: <new-backend-store>  # changed to new backend store type (such as seastore in the future)
```

```

- Operator will check the existing OSD deployment labels to identify the OSDs that have different backend store.
- Operator will start the migration for these OSDs.

### Migrate OSDs for Multiple Scenarios
- Users can update multiple settings in the cephCluster CR at the same time. For example, enable encryption and change backing store.
- The operator would migrate the OSDs and apply all the new settings.

### Migration Status:
- Operator will store the OSD migration status info in `status.storage.osd`
  ``` yaml
  status:
   storage:
      osd:
       migrationStatus:
        completed: 3
        pending: 5
  ```

  - `osd.migrationStatus.completed`: Total number of OSDs that got migrated.
  - `osd.migrationStatus.pending`: Total number of OSDs that are pending migration.
  - The cluster's `phase` should be set to `progressing` while OSDs are migrating

### Automated OSD Migration Process
- The operator's reconciler will migrate one OSD at a time.
- A configmap will be used to store the OSD ID currently being migrated.

> OSD replacement steps:

Reviewer: need a blank line before/after bullet list, or else the markdown rendering is not right
```suggestion

OSD replacement steps:

```

  and application data on slower media.
- Setups with multiple OSDs per drive, though with recent Ceph releases the
  motivation for deploying this way is mostly obviated.

> - Mix of encrypted and unencrypted OSDs in the cluster.

Reviewer: Since the encrypted setting is on a `storageClassDeviceSet`, is there any reason not to support a mix of encrypted/unencrypted OSDs as long as they are in different device sets? I just heard someone asking for this scenario a couple days ago. In that case, this migration feature may need to only migrate a subset of OSDs. Basically, we would need to migrate whichever OSDs don't match their desired settings.

Author: That looks like something that can be done. Removing it from the non-goals.

## Proposal
- Since migration requires destroying of the OSD and cleaning data from the disk,
  a user confirmation in the CR is required before proceeding.
- Operator would identify the OSDs that need migration according to the updated
  configuration and existing OSD deployment labels
- Operator would display the status of OSD migration in the cephCluster CR status.

### API Changes
- Add `spec.storage.migration` in the CephCluster resource.

  ```yaml
  storage:
    migration:
        confirmation: yes-really-migrate-osds
  ```
  - `confirmation`: Confirmation from the user that they really want to migrate the OSDs.
    This field can only take the value `yes-really-migrate-osds`.

### Enable Encryption
- Storage spec for a brownfield cluster without encryption:
```yaml
storage:
   storageClassDeviceSets:
     - name: set1
       count: 3
       encrypted: false
```
- User can enable encryption by updating the spec:
``` yaml
 storage:
   migration:
    confirmation: "yes-really-migrate-osds"
   storageClassDeviceSets:

>      - name: set1

Reviewer 2: what will happen in case of multiple device set,

What will the base value `true` or `false`

In case one device class has encryption and one dont have

Author: We should be able to support the scenario where only some deviceClasses have encryption enabled and some don't. It would required querying the OSDs based on the deviceClass.

``` yaml
 storage:
   migration:
    confirmation: "yes-really-migrate-osds"
   store:
     type: <new-backend-store>  # changed to new backend store type (such as seastore in the future)
```

- Operator will check the OSD deployment label `osd-store` to identify the OSDs that have different backend store.
- Operator will start the migration for these OSDs.

### Migrate OSDs for Multiple Scenarios
- Users can update multiple settings in the cephCluster CR at the same time. For example, enable encryption and change backing store.
- The operator would migrate the OSDs and apply all the new settings.

### Migration Status:
- Operator will store the OSD migration status info in `status.storage.osd`
  ``` yaml
  status:
   storage:
      osd:
       migrationStatus:
        pending: 5
  ```
  - `osd.migrationStatus.pending`: Total number of OSDs that are pending migration.
  - The cluster's `phase` should be set to `progressing` while OSDs are migrating

### Automated OSD Migration Process
- The operator's reconciler will migrate one OSD at a time.
- A configmap will be used to store the OSD ID currently being migrated.

OSD replacement steps:

> 1. List all OSDs where `osd-store:<osd store type>` does not match `spec.storage.store.type`.

Reviewer 3: are we planning to rework this to do this on a per-deviceset basis still?

Author: This example is of the OSD Store type. This is a global setting (in `spec.storage`) is applied for all the devicesets. But in case of encryption, which is per deviceset setting, migration will be done per-deviceset only.

1. If all PGs are not `active+clean`, do not proceed.
1. If all PGs are `active+clean` but a previous OSD migration is not completed, do not proceed.
1. If all PGs are `active+clean` and no migration is in progress, then select an OSD to be migrated.
1. Delete the OSD deployment.
1. Create an OSD prepare job with an environment variable indictating the OSD ID to be replaced.
1. The OSD prepare pod will destroy the OSD (`ceph osd destroy {id} --yes-i-really-mean-it`) and prepare it again using the same OSD ID. Refer [Destroy OSD](#destroy-osd) for details.

> 1. Once the destroyed OSD pod is recreated, delete the configmap.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Once the destroyed OSD pod is recreated, delete the configmap.
```

question: if there are more than 1 osd to migrate, we'll be creating new confogmap each time?

Author: yes, the idea is to delete the configmap after migration of each OSD.

Author: If the OSD migration goes wrong, reconciling the operator might not resolve it, as the OSD migraiton requires a number of step.  So if the configMap from previous migration is still present, we can safely assume the last migration didn't succeed. So rook can halt any further migration.

Reviewer 3: This is a really good detail. Thanks Santosh. Since these are long running operations it's much more likely that the operator might have an issue during the process, and we have to make sure Rook can restart close where it left off without issues.

  motivation for deploying this way is mostly obviated.

## Proposal
- Since migration requires destroying of the OSD and cleaning data from the disk,
  a user confirmation in the CR is required before proceeding.
- Operator would identify the OSDs that need migration according to the updated
  configuration and existing OSD deployment labels
- Operator would display the status of OSD migration in the cephCluster CR status.

### API Changes
- Add `spec.storage.migration` in the CephCluster resource.

  ```yaml
  storage:
    migration:
        confirmation: yes-really-migrate-osds
  ```
  - `confirmation`: Confirmation from the user that they really want to migrate the OSDs.
    This field can only take the value `yes-really-migrate-osds`.

### Enable Encryption
- Storage spec for a brownfield cluster without encryption:
```yaml
storage:
   storageClassDeviceSets:
     - name: set1
       count: 3
       encrypted: false
```
- User can enable encryption by updating the spec:
``` yaml
 storage:
   migration:
    confirmation: "yes-really-migrate-osds"
   storageClassDeviceSets:
     - name: set1
       count: 3
       encrypted: true  # changed to true
```

> - Operator will check the OSD deployment `encrypted: false` to identify the OSDs that are not encrypted.

Reviewer 2: can we repharse this, as we will be dealing with mix osds

Reviewer 2: any update ? @sp98 ?

Author: @parth-gr this looks correct to me since it describes the case where `encryption` is enabled by the user.

## Proposal

### API Changes
- Add `spec.storage.osdMigrate` in the Ceph cluster YAML.

  ```yaml
  storage:
    osdMigrate:

>       event: UPDATE_STORE|ENABLE_ENCRYPTION

Reviewer 2: What if the user wants to perform both the operation in the same migration?

Author: That's a good question. Technically it should be possible but we should not increase the complexity and let the users migrate the OSDs for one `event` at a time.

Reviewer 2: But we can just make this api to take array of events?

Author: We are supporting both the operations. Users can migrate OSDs for both encryption and for changing OSD store type. Other options can also be added in the future.
